# Glossary

* <a href name="function"></a>**function**: in the context of this specification, function (or sometimes *user function*) means the piece of code that an invoker will allow invoking. Such a function is written and executed in a [target runtime](#target-runtime). A function may have basic request / reply semantics, where passing one or several value produce one or several results. Or it may be [reactive](#reactive) (or streaming) where, depending on its implementation language, it manipulates streams of data.
* <a href name="interaction-model"></a>**interaction-model**: one of the two ways to interact with a function: either [request / reply](#request-reply) or [streaming](#streaming). Note that a function may be written for that interaction model in particular (a *streaming* funciton is meant to be invoked in a *streaming* fashion), but some bridges exist: in come conditions, a request / reply function can be invoked in a streaming fashion, and [some streaming functions can be invoked using request / reply](request-reply.md#support-for-streaming-functions).
* <a href name="invoker"></a>**invoker**: an invoker is the core piece of behavior that this specification deals with. An invoker is a bridging component that allows to turn a simple *function* into something that can be interacted with from the "outside" in the riff ecosystem. The role of the invoker is to deal with protocol ceremony in a consistent manner, so that the function doesn't have to.
* <a href name="multiplexing"></a>**multiplexing**: in the context of the [streaming interaction model](streaming.md), multiplexing is the act of using a single communication channel to transmit several messages that originate from several channels. Conversely, demultiplexing is the reverse operation: extracting messages from a single channel and address them to their correct destination.
* <a href name="reactive"></a>**reactive**: see [streaming](#streaming).
* <a href name="request-reply"></a>**request / reply**: denotes both an [interaction model](#interaction-model) in which a function is invoked by submitting a single value to it (the *request*) and expecting a synchronous result (the *reply*), and also the family of functions that are well suited for this interaction model (that is, non-[streaming](#streaming) functions that accept exactly one parameter and produce exactly one result).
* <a href name="rpc"></a>**remote procedure call**: the act of invoking a method or procedure remotely from a client, using a well defined protocol (of which [gRPC](https://grpc.io) is an example, which riff streaming happens to be using). Depending on the context, may also refer to a unique invocation of such a procedure remotely (*i.e.* a single *call*).
* <a href name="serialization"></a>**serialization / de-serilization**: the process of representing a given data structure as a series of bytes for transmission on a wire (serialization), or the converse operation: turning a series of bytes into a data structure.
* <a href name="stream-completion"></a>**stream completion**: in the strictest of senses, and as defined by the [reactive streams](https://www.reactive-streams.org/) specification, refers to the successful [terminal state](https://github.com/reactive-streams/reactive-streams-jvm/blob/v1.0.3/README.md#term_terminal_state) (*i.e.* non error) of a stream.
* <a href name="streaming"></a>**streaming**: a *streaming* function is a function that accepts at least one parameter, or produces at least one result whole value has no immediate business meaning but instead is a vehicle for pulling (or pushing) values. The number and rate of production of those values is not known in advance and it is expected that handling of values happens asynchronously.
* <a href name="streaming-processor"></a>**streaming processor**: a streaming processor is a component of the riff ecosystem, whose role is to bridge the function (with its invoker) to the rest of the streaming world, typically message brokers. One incarnation of such a system lives in [this repository](https://github.com/projectriff/streaming-processor) but its behavior should not be considered part of this specification.
* <a href name="target-runtime"></a>**target runtime**: in this specification, the words *target runtime* refer to the specific environment a function and its invoker run-in. By extension, it also describes the "source" form of the ecosystem where the function and the invoker live. As an example, in the case of functions written in the Java language, the execution environment may be a JRE, but the term *depending on the target runtime* may refer to rules governing the Java language itself (*e.g.* the fact that types in a Java function signature may be discovered).
